In this video we will learn about pointers.
So, first of all, I'll give you the definition of a pointer. What does it mean by pointer? and Why we require
Why we require pointers?
Then I'll show you how to declare and how to initialize,
What does it mean by dereferencing?
And we'll also learn about dynamic memory allocation. So, Let us start with the definition.
See, the definition of a pointer. Pointer is an address variable that is meant for storing address of data,
not the data itself; normal variables are data variables, but the pointers are address variables, and Pointers
are used for indirectly accessing the data.
So the question is, Why do you need to access data indirectly?
So let us understand why actually we need pointers.
Then we will see how to declare and use them.
So first of all see this picture again I'm drawing it here.
See this is the main memory.
Main memory.
Right.
And this is the CPU which will execute our programs. So, how this main memory is utilized?
Already this picture we're following it.
This is divided into three parts here.
Actually our program resides.
So I'm writing main function.
It will be having more of the functions.
Now, this area, See this is a stack, so actually stack will be on the top, right, but I'm showing it here.
Then the other part of the memories heap memory.
So the main memory is divided into three sections and utilized this is code section.
This is code section, and this is stack, and this is heap. So Code section, and, this will be stack and
this will be heap, but I usually show here as the stack, so it's easy for understanding. Anyway,
There are three portions of memory, code section, stack and heap.
So the program will utilize the main memory by dividing into three sections.
So this program can directly access these two areas.
What are those? code section and stack; program will not automatically access heap, right. The policy for program is
It will not directly access it.
So heap memory is external to the program, outside the program.
So program doesn't directly access, then how to access that? From that it needs a pointer.
Yes, one of the reason of using pointer is accessing heap memory.
So program should have a pointer within itself and with that point that it can access anything
in the heap.
So I may have an array or anything inside heap and the program can access it.
So, for accessing this memory from the program we need a pointer. So, pointer is useful for accessing the
resources that are outside the program.
So this is one example, heap is one thing. Then, if the files are on the hard disk, now for accessing
a file, program cannot access this hard disk files directly, because hard disk is external or files are
external to a program, so far that, it needs a pointer for accessing and that pointer should be a file
type and we can access that file. Then, a program may be accessing a keyboard, a program may be accessing
a monitor, a program may be accessing internet or network connection, all these things are external to
a program, so all these things can be accessed with the help of pointers. So, one major usage of pointer
is accessing the resources which are outside the program.
So, I will list it, see pointers are used for accessing heap memory, right, and for accessing resources
and pointers are used for parameter passing also, this I will be explaining
afterwards, how pointers are useful for passing parameters.
So these are the major usages of pointer. Accessing heap, which is like a resource accessing, other resources
or parameter passing.
So, now next, Let us learn how to declare a pointer, how to initialize and how to use it.
So by taking some small example, I will show you. This is our data variable.
I'm declaring a and also initialize it, right.
So this is a data variable, and normally we declare variables like this.
Then, second thing, pointer.
This is the address variable, right.
This is an address variable, so address variables are called as pointers in C C++ .
Normally we declare the variables like this.
Suppose this is inside a main function,
I'm writing it as a function, okay,
So this variable, it will occupy the memory inside the stack frame of our main function, inside the
stack, like it is having value 10.
So if I draw its bigger picture here,
So, like, this is there. Suppose,
This is taking 2 bytes, integer is taking 2 bytes, so it's as
200 and 201.
There are two bytes in which this value is stored.
One is 200 and other is 201, right, so 2 bytes.
See that is the reason to show only 2 bytes,
I am saying integer is taking 2 bytes, so 2 addresses. Now, this is a pointer, this pointer I will initialize it,
So, I will initialize it in the next line.
p = &a ;
So this will store the address of a.
So what is this p?
p will also occupy memory, pointer is also variable.
This will also occupy memory.
So this is created inside the stack frame of the same main function.
If I show it diagrammatically, it looks like this. This pointer will also take 2 bytes.
So let us say the address of this pointer is 210 and 211, just I am assuming a random number,
Don't confuse that, the next should be 202. Whatever it may be,
I am saying it is as 210 and 211. Now, when I say &a,
This will have the address of this variable, So it is pointing to this one.
So here, inside the memory if you see this is pointing to this one. So that pointer is pointing there, right.
Now focus on the syntax.
This is a variable, this is a pointer variable.
This is initialization, address of a variable is given to p.
Now, I want to access this 10, So I want to print, so I can say printf ("%d", a) ;
So, this will print the value. Then,
I want to access same thing by using pointer.
So, from pointer I want to access it.
So again, I will say  printf ("%d",  and if I say p, it will be taking 200, but no I want this
data.
So say *p.
So, this is declaration, and this is assignment or initialization,
That is, it is initialized with some value, and this is dereferencing, this portion is dereferencing.
So when you are dereferencing, you have to use *, and declaring you have to use a * and initialization
directly we can write p.
So you have to get familiar with the syntax, declaration, initialization, dereferencing.
So this how I have already taken a data variable and making a pointer point on it.
In this example I'm not using pointer to access the heap memory, but next I will show you how to access
heap memory using a pointer.
I will declare a pointer variable. First of all, this is a pointer variable.
So this, whenever you declare something, that definitely takes place in stack; stack frame of that particular
function. So, p is created here,
Right.
Whenever you declare it will be inside stack. Remember, every variable declared, when you declare the variable
it will be inside stack.
Now I want to allocate memory in heap.
So I want to create an array of size of 5 in the heap.
So, how to get memory in heap?
In C language the function name is malloc ( ).
When you write malloc ( ), then only you get the memory in heap.
So here I will write down, malloc ( ) .
So for this I have to include some library, that is, #include  , right.
Now I can use this function malloc ( )
Now here, I should mention the size, so malloc ( )
take the size, how much memory you want.
So you have to mention in terms of bytes.
So I want 5 integer so, 5.
Then what is the size of the integer we are assuming it as 2 bytes.
So let the compiler decide it.
see, we are assuming it, but it may be taking 4 bytes, or 2 bytes, so let the compiler decide the size,
so we can use the operator, called the sizeof operator and to that
operator, I will pass int, so it will give the size of an integer, size of integer, if it is 2 bytes then
2*5, total 10 bytes of memory this malloc ( ) function will allocate. So, it will allocate total 5 integers,
right. Now, that memory is allocated. Suppose the starting address of this is 5000, for example,
First byte address is 5000, and so on. Then, that should be pointed by a pointer because we cannot access
it unless we have a pointer.
So I will assign this to a pointer.
Now this malloc ( ) function returns void pointer.
So we have to type-caste it and say it is integer pointer.
Now this line will allocate heap memory.
Remember, whenever you say malloc then only it will allocate in heap.
So this p, will be pointing on this one.
So p will get the address 5000.
So, it is just like something is there in heap,
now, pointer is holding it, right. It is just holding one edge of that array that is 5000.
Now using that pointer we can access the entire array.
So this is how heap memory is created. And how to do the same thing in C++?
So just we have to say  new. new is an operator in C++ of type Integer and say size, 5.
So in C++ it is very simple.
This is C++, and this C language. C language syntax is a little bit lengthy and C++ is very simple.
So while explanation, I maybe writing new
most of the time, right, on whiteboard; But actually in C language, I have to use malloc ( ) function for allocating
memory in heap.
So, this is how pointers are used for creating heap memory.
So this was the introduction of a pointer. In the coming videos, we will see how to have a pointer upon
an array and how to have a pointer upon a structure.
We'll learn about all these things.